Now, if you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn with me to Luke chapter 24.
And if you want, also put your finger in Leviticus chapter 1.
I want to say a few words by way of introduction.
And then also just to recognize with you that we are tonight introducing this book of Leviticus.
You know, why study this?
I mentioned this morning that this is probably one of those books.
It may be the chief book that Christians avoid when they choose to read the Bible, but that it was actually the first book taught to the children in the ancient synagogue.
And interesting and very famously, Jesus
on the road to Emmaus after his resurrection encountered some disciples.
They didn't recognize him.
They thought their hopes were dashed.
They didn't realize Jesus was the risen Savior and no longer in the grave.
And in Luke 24, so if you're there, among many other things, Jesus in speaking to them, said to them at verse 25, O foolish ones and slow of hearts to believe,
All the prophets have spoken.
Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into glory?
And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.
Now, wouldn't you have liked to have been there to hear Jesus give the Bible study that explains his glorious resurrection?
We don't know what all he said, but he began with Moses.
That's the first five books of your Bible.
Would I think be surprising if he didn't touch on Leviticus?
For instance, chapter 16 is that chapter about the day of atonement, which was celebrated yearly in Israel.
And Jesus himself is the atoning sacrifice and the priest who offers that sacrifice.
And so in any case,
I think there's much here for us to learn and I'm excited about this study and I'm glad that you've joined us in it.
Before we read the Word of God in Leviticus chapter 1, let's pray together.
Father in Heaven, we ask for your blessing.
All Scripture is God breathed and is profitable for teaching and rebuking and correcting and training and righteousness.
man or woman of God might be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
And so we pray that you would teach us your word and bring much good for your glory and good for us and good for others through it.
In Jesus' name, amen.
Okay, this evening, I want to introduce the book to you.
So let's just read
Leviticus chapter one, verses one and two.
And then we'll just sort of think about this together.
This is the word of God.
The Lord called Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying, speak to the people of Israel and say to them, when any one of you brings an offering to the Lord, you shall bring your offering of livestock from the herd.
or from the flock.
This is the Word of God.
May he bless it to us.
I want to do two things with us this evening.
First, I want to ask the question, why not study Leviticus?
And then secondly, why study Leviticus?
And so to begin, why not study it?
And there are many reasons people give for justifying why it's
not a worthy thing to read, study, certainly to believe.
And that's part because there are many strange things in Leviticus or things that are strange to our ears.
Some would object that it's bloody offensive, that they would know.
It's filled with sacrifices of animals and the blood of bulls and goats and so on.
And they would ask it, you know, like this, well, what's with this blood and gore thing?
I mean, you want me to believe that a man somehow had to die and that God made a bloody mess of his own son and Leviticus foreshadows that and he did it in order to win us
to himself, why is it that blood is required?
Can't God just simply forgive?
It was perhaps provocatively put.
And I just don't want to shirt what others are saying about these things, the very famous and popular in our generation atheist Christopher Hitchens said it like this.
Once again, we have a father demonstrating love.
by subjecting his own son to death by torture.
But this time the father's not trying to impress God, he is God, and he's trying to impress humans.
Ask yourself the question, how moral is the following?
I am told of a human sacrifice that took place 2,000 years ago without my wishing it in circumstances so ghastly that had I been present and in possession of any influence, I would have been duty bound to try and stop it.
and in consequence of this murder, my own manifold sins are forgiven me, and I may hope to have everlasting life."
Now, I said it was provocative.
It's provocative.
It's deeply misleading.
It thoroughly misunderstands the events of the life of Christ, the intention
of God and of Jesus himself in these events, of course.
It's not child abuse for Christ to be upon a cross.
And we'll talk about things as we go through Leviticus, which points us to the Lamb, who takes away the sin of the world.
But the father and the son, he eternally agreed to these things, and the son, even in his flesh, was not a child.
He was an adult man, and he was not forced against his own will, but he freely volunteered
for our sake to give himself because it was necessary to save us.
But many misunderstand these things and then give misleading versions of what this book is all about, including why the blood and why the gore of animal sacrifice.
But others would say, no, it's just crazy nonsense.
Leviticus, you'll have these discussions with people, and they'll say, or maybe you'll say, well, I believe that homosexuality is a sin.
And somebody might respond to you and say, oh, did you get that from Leviticus?
And you know that the same chapter in Leviticus that speaks about homosexuality also tells you not to wear clothing with different kinds of threaded material in them.
Do you do that or do you wear cotton blend shirts?
And so you get these kinds of arguments that seek to sort of belittle or think they're showing its nonsense.
And so you'll get a back and forth on this.
Leviticus can be like a tennis match where the ball is bouncing back and forth.
Leviticus can be kind of whipping boys, as a friend of mine put it.
President Obama in 2008 was trying to explain how dangerous it is to bring religion into politics.
And I agree, it can be difficult to do it well, but I don't think we ought to divide these things.
But here's what he said.
He said, if we bring the Bible into public debate, would it be James Dobson's or Al Sharpton's opinion we should follow?
which passages of scripture should guide our public policy.
Should we go, says former President Obama, should we go with Leviticus which suggests that slavery is okay and that eating shellfish is an abomination?
You see, just the presence of Leviticus in the canon of scripture can be a stumbling block for people, especially as they misunderstand
the meaning of passages like this, and they want to just throw up their hands and say, it's nonsense and unreasonable.
Others would say, no, here's the problem.
It's just boring confusion.
I mean, even Christians do tend to treat it as the book we wish would go away.
Many of us stopped when we determined to read the Bible 3.
And we read Genesis, and it's just filled with stories, and then Exodus, and the story of the Exodus itself is very compelling, and you get to the Ten Commandments.
And then after that, you do get laws about building the tabernacle and such, and it kind of slows down a little bit, I think, for a lot of us, and then you're hoping, well, here comes Leviticus, something of great interest will happen, and you discover that it's a whole lot of laws.
About priests and sacrifices and things clean and unclean and gross things are talked about and and and many Get a little I mean, let's be honest.
You may be bored as well as confused Donby said it made him fall asleep, you know So some would would say why bother?
And then others would say, no, you shouldn't bother with Leviticus because it has untrustworthy authorship.
And that is to say, well, we just read chapter one verse one, that the Lord called Moses and spoke to him from the tent of meetings, say, speak to the people of Israel, and God told Moses what to tell people.
There has been, and widely,
dispersed view that you can't believe that Moses gave us, or God gave this book to Moses, Moses gave this book to the children of Israel.
And there was a view, it's probably lost some of its force, but hundreds of people got PhDs following this view that the first five books of the Bible were not given by Moses in its authorship.
that actually J.E.P.
and D gave us that.
Who are J.E.P.
and D, that shorthand for the Jehovah's, who uses the name Jehovah of God, and the Elohist, who uses the name Elohim for God, and P for Priestly, that is, whoever it was that was interested in all the Priestly kinds of things, and then the Deuteronomist, D,
who gave us Deuteronomy and this came about following or first propagated in the 1800s by Julius Wellhausen who took Darwin's evolutionary approach to biology and sought to apply it to the history of religion.
So he's thinking in an evolutionary way and he hypothesized in evolutionary development of religion
moving from disorder to order, from lack of structure to structure, from informality to formality, from the warmth of spontaneity to the coldness of heartless ritual.
And in this view, Leviticus was viewed as the manual of heartless ritual, organized priesthood, and therefore it must come late in the game as a priestly revision
a cold-hearted priestly revision of what had been given.
We could say a lot about these things asking me about them afterwards, but there's absolutely no manuscript evidence for that view.
the literally hundreds of people who have gotten PhDs working on this, we have no manuscript evidence suggested of four different authors or even many revisionists.
We have no manuscript evidence for like partially written works that later we can find somebody came in and finished out or cleaned up or highly modified.
We have none of that.
We just have the book of Leviticus.
And in fact,
It's the books that follow Deuteronomy and Joshua that quote Leviticus rather than Leviticus quoting Deuteronomy and Joshua, which is again suggestive that Leviticus came before those and not after as a way to sort of organize in a heartless way the religion of God's people.
So there's more to say about those things, but you understand people think it's bloody
an offensive or it's crazy nonsense, or it's boring confusion, or it has an untrustworthy authorship.
And so these are all reasons why people would say, don't bother.
What are you fools doing?
Chief among them, the guy preaching it.
Well, in any case, we might say this.
I'd rather want to invite you on a journey of discovery.
And certainly invite your questions along the way, but isn't it possible we can make sense of, with God's help, His book?
And isn't it possible that so much of the weirdness has a decent explanation?
And if we can find in this book that it actually means something, doesn't it mean also that we can find meaningful things in all the rest of the Bible?
And so we want to actually study Leviticus.
I want to then turn to our second question, which is why study Leviticus, as opposed to why not?
Why?
What benefit is there in this book for us?
And I want to highlight three things this evening.
Just big picture things as you think about the material before us.
I want us to see the good news in the shadows.
And I want us to see that there's access to the deity.
And I want us to see the reality behind the rituals.
In the first place, there is good news in these shadows.
But it is in shadow.
It's in pencil sketch form, so to speak.
And the whole color has yet been thrown on the canvas.
And the color is the New Testament, the coming of Jesus in fulfillment.
But it's there in pencil sketch.
form in Hebrews.
In fact, Hebrews in Leviticus.
Hebrews chapter 8, when we studied that, said that the people weren't being invited to believe in something new and novel, but rather that the things they had begun to believe about Jesus had already been given to them in copies.
Hebrews chapter 8 verse 5, they survey, speaking of the Old Testament, they survey copy and a shadow
of the heavenly things.
See, Moses was actually called up into the presence of God in Exodus and he was shown the true realities, the true heavenly glories.
And then he was told to come back down to earth and told to make an earthly copy of the heavenly realities.
And so that's what you then have in the book of Exodus with the creation of the tabernacle.
And these things were a picture.
And yet in some ways like an edge sketch.
And now that we have the reality, we can see things better, more clearly, more gloriously.
But it's not that the old doesn't help us understand the new.
Oh no, it definitely does.
And it's really important.
It can actually help stabilize our Christian faith.
I don't know if you've ever been able to go up inside the Statue of Liberty before.
I think maybe it's still, I don't even know if you can get into it anymore ever since 9-11, but it used to be you could go up inside it up into the crowd or maybe the Washington Monument.
which you could, I think, still do.
And you go into these amazing buildings that are just incredible from the outside.
And when you go inside them, it's nothing like what's on the outside.
All you see on the inside is scaffolding and cross beams and columns of steel with massive empty spaces between posts and joists.
But of course, what it's doing is it's supplying the building blocks for the full expression of the beauty that is on the outside.
And so it is with so much of our Old Testament.
It's giving to us in these Old Testament forms the building blocks of what we see more gloriously in the coming of Christ.
And so it's designed to actually build our confidence in the trustworthy that is
of God's Word and in his faithfulness to fulfill his promises.
So Leviticus is the Christian message in early draft form.
It's the same message but pointing forward to the true prophet, Priest and King, the true Lamb of God, who makes the true sacrifice
of atonement.
So it's the gospel and shadows.
That's the first thing and first reason to study.
The second is there's access to the deity and we're shown the way of access.
You know the context of the book of Leviticus is that of course it was written to the Jewish people within days of being released from 400 years of slavery in Egypt.
Every day in slavery they were controlled by cruel taskmasters.
every day the gods of Egypt were thrown in their faces and you can imagine their frustration.
Where's the true God who promised to Abraham and to his descendants that he would be their God and we would be his people?
When will he finally dwell with us?
And God says to Moses here, in Exodus, I want you to come up on the mountain.
I wanna show you my glory
And Moses sees things he can hardly believe.
And when he gazes on the reality of God in his glory, God tells him, now I want you to go down and I want you to build a little tent, a little architectural model of what you've seen in the presence of my glory, a tabernacle, a worship center, an earthly copy of heavenly realities, although in Exodus 25,
verses eight, nine, God says, and let them make a sanctuary that I make dwell in their midst.
Exactly as I show you concerning the pattern of the tabernacle and of all its furnishing furniture, you shall make it.
And again, in Exodus 29, God says, I will consecrate the tent of meeting and the altar.
Aaron also, and his sons, I will consecrate to serve me as priests, and I will dwell among the people of Israel and will be their God.
And so you have in Exodus, God giving the worship center.
And in Leviticus, you have God explaining now here are the parts and pieces and the people involved in that worship.
Every piece of furniture and every piece of material, every room, every wall is preaching that God dwells in the midst of his people.
And there is access to him in the way that he has given it.
And so Leviticus immediately follows that and they're told, here's what you do when you come to the worship center.
And if you're making an offering, well, here's what you do if it's an offering from the herd or an offering from the flock and so forth.
And what we're going to see, of course, over the unfolding of Leviticus, let me just give you a brief outline, is in chapters one to seven, basically the various sacrifices and offerings that would be brought.
And in chapters eight through 10, teaching about the priests who would make those offerings.
And then in chapters 11 to 15, various rules about things that are clean and unclean, things that are appropriate to enter into the tabernacle and things that should not come in culminating in the first half of the book with, as I said before, chapter 16, the day of atonement, that yearly high feast of Israel.
where God provided for the atonement of all of their sins.
And then you turn to chapter 17 through the end and you basically get the code of holiness and what it looks like to love.
Actually, the famous love passage of Jesus where he says, you shall love your neighbor as yourself is found in the second half of Leviticus.
And so you'll learn and the people of Israel were to learn.
Here's how you then live a life of love in light of the access you have to me and my presence dwelling with you.
And so Leviticus is telling the people in a variety of ways if you want to have access to the deity.
You need a mediator?
You need a priest.
You need an atoning sacrifice.
You need the forgiveness of your sins.
But these things, says God, I supply.
I've not left you without all that you need for me to dwell with you and you to have me as your God.
So there's access to the deity.
And the final thing we're going to see in our study of Leviticus is
is that there's reality behind the ritual.
Now, of course, as you're reading Leviticus, there are an enormous number of regulations and laws.
And they can be confusing.
Some of them, many of them, we already know that we have been released from.
In Jesus, for instance, Jesus declares all foods clean.
It's Leviticus that tells us there's clean and unclean food.
And then Jesus says, y'all go ahead and eat that shrimp.
But in any case, one of my Old Testament professors who wrote a commentary on Leviticus said that the study was so tedious, it wore him out.
Till he got to the end and saw that that was the point
What do you mean?
That the law was meant to, in a manner of speaking, weigh us down so that we would realize our sinfulness in our lawlessness and our inability to keep the law so that we could enjoy saving grace in Jesus and to be freed from the law in Jesus.
And so we're going to have a lot of things we're going to think through together, but the ritual isn't foolish and it isn't useless.
But we can certainly thank God that Jesus abolished it to free us from it.
You didn't have to bring an animal for slaughter this evening.
Let's be grateful for that.
But that doesn't mean rituals are useless.
Think about our own humanity and how rituals help us.
You probably have your own rituals that you enact in association with various holidays.
You have Thanksgiving rituals or Easter rituals or birthday celebrations.
And if the different, and I don't know what it is, food or games or time spent or
Whatever, if it's missing, you feel like you missed out on that holiday because there's something there that's meaningful.
For years, we don't do it so much anymore.
But for years, the big meal of Sunday was the Sunday noon meal.
We'd get home from worship and we'd already have in the oven a roast and carrots and potatoes.
and we'd have green beans going, and then we'd have gravy, and then maybe we'd have biscuits.
And we would just, well, I mean, I would be leading in worship, and I couldn't help thinking sometimes about the feast that was ahead of us on the feast day of the Lord, the Holy Sunday Sabbath anyway.
I would daydream sometimes about these things, and I'm sure many of you might have some more things.
But in any case, it was a day.
When, you know, the kids didn't have to do their schoolwork at our house.
It was the day when they didn't have to do their normal kinds of chores.
The Sabbath day was the day of pleasure in the enjoyment of God and God's people and rest and fellowship and all that kind of stuff.
And one Saturday night, Melinda asked me what I wanted for Sunday dinner.
that next morning.
And this was after a long holiday season in which we had a variety of feasts already.
And I threw our curveball.
I said, you know, we feasted for so long on seafood and ham and turkey and rich desserts.
I was craving something lighter.
And so I said to her, surprisingly, how about a salad?
And well, she went along with me.
And then poor Caleb, young Caleb, our son, leaned over during worship and said, in a whisper, what's for dinner?
And she just told him, you don't want to know.
The interruption of the ritual is jarring.
But we were together, so it was okay.
In the South, I'm sure it was fabulous, but it wasn't a roasted gravy.
But in any case, Leviticus is giving us this graphic visual aid and rituals that help the people of God taste God's grace and then express their faith in concrete ways.
And there's reality behind the rituals.
And for most of us, we've inherited Christianity concerned with the internal, the reflective, the cognitive.
We're all in our head or in our brain or navel gazing or such.
And yet, Leviticus comes to us with the blood and guts of Christianity, literally.
And as another pastor put it, instead of a treatise on the nature of the kingdom of death and its opposition to the kingdom of life,
Instead, God instructs his people with strange skin diseases to steer clear of the temple until they're clean.
And instead of trying to describe a very abstract idea like substitutionary atonement, Leviticus instead gives you instructions on how to slit the throat of the lamb.
The picture of blood splattering on your clothes as the lamb is placed on the fire, lends vivid imagery to the penalty of sin.
The entire sacrificial system becomes one giant prop of visual aid to find out what it means to truly be in relationship with God.
And we might say in the way in which God has commanded and in the way in which God has invited us.
So this reality behind the ritual praise God Jesus has fulfilled that which has been taught and
promise.
So I'd invite you to stick around the next many months as we plow through Leviticus that we might see Jesus better together and see the rich foreshadowing it gives us of the glory of Christ.
Let's pray together.
Father, thank you.
that you are a God who dwells with His people and that Jesus is God incarnate, God in the flesh, the true tabernacle of God.
Thank you that He's our true high priest who offered the one true final perfect sacrifice of atonement for our sins to reconcile us to you and you to us.
And so we would see Jesus, Lord, help us in that.
In His name I pray.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.